Thomas Stamford Raffles arrived and signed a treaty with Sultan Hussein Shah of Johor, on behalf of the British East India Company, to develop the southern part of Singapore as a British trading post.
Ghee Hin Kongsi and Hai San Secret Society, 2 secret societies in Singapore and Malaya was established.
The Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824 was signed by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands to address issues regarding trade rights in the Spice Islands.
The Burney Treaty was signed between Thailand and the United Kingdom, partitioning the northern Malay states between the two countries.
The Straits Settlements were established as part of the territories controlled by the British East India Company.
The opposition of Dol Said to British taxation policy in Naning led to the Naning War. Dol Said's force defeated 150 British soldiers led by Captain Wyllie.
The Kingdom of Sarawak was established by Sir James Brooke after a grant of independence from the Sultanate of Brunei.
War expedition established by Sir James Brooke to attack the Rentap and the Dayak Iban tribe at Saribas began.
Alan Lee, officer in charge of another fort at Nanga Lingga, Sri Aman was defeated and killed by Rentap.
1857 Chinese Uprising: Liu Shan Bang, leader of the gold miners in Pangkalan Tebang started a rebellion against the White Rajahs in Bau, Sarawak.
First Larut War: conflict by arguments over control of watercourse to their mines escalated and led members of the Hai San Society to drive the members of the Ghee Hin society out of Kamunting.[6][7][8][9]
Second Larut War: started off by a gambling quarrel in June of that year between members of Ghee Hin Kongsi and Hai San Secret Society.
Klang War: Raja Mahadi challenged Raja Abdullah for authority over Klang.
The Straits Settlements came under direct British control as a crown colony.
Rentap's fortress at Nanga Skrang was successfully infiltrated by the attacking party of Tuan Muda Charles Brooke and Rentap ultimately retired from the war.
Third Larut War: began by an affair between Ghee Hin and Hai San and conflict between the succession for the next Sultan of Perak between Raja Abdullah and Raja Ismail.
Tristram Speedy sailed to the Straits Settlements in Malaya and became superintendent of police on the island of Penang.
Tristram Speedy commanded a body of Indian troops to restore order in Larut, a Malayan mining district, for the Menteri (Chief Minister) Ngah Ibrahim.
Tristram Speedy commanded a body of Indian troops to restore order in Larut, a Malayan mining district, for the Menteri (Chief Minister) Ngah Ibrahim.
Civil war break out in Seremban between the forces of Dato' Kelana and Dato' Shahbandar due to dissatisfaction about their rights to collect taxes and ownership and control of the mines. British sided with Dato' Kelana defeated its opposition and Sungai Ujong successfully felt to the hand of British forces.
The Pangkor Treaty of 1874 signalled official British involvement in the policies of the Malays, and the establishment of British Malaya.
James W. W. Birch, the first Resident of Perak was assassinated by local Malay chief, Dato Maharajalela and his follower, Seputum in Pasir Salak.
Perak War: The sultan of Upper Perak and other local chiefs attempted to end foreign influence in the region and remove the British administrator James W.W. Birch.
Following the trial held in 1875 between 14 and 22 December in Matang, Perak, Abdullah Muhammad Shah II of Perak and Ngah Ibrahim were exiled to the Seychelles.
Lela Pandak Lam was executed by hanging in Taiping.
Jementah Civil War: Tengku Alam Shah refused to place Muar under the temporary administration of Sultan Abu Bakar of Johor.
North Borneo became a British protectorate under the sovereign North Borneo Chartered Company.
Terengganu Inscription Stone was discovered by villagers at a steep sloping riverbank of Tersat river, Kampung Buluh, Kuala Berang, Hulu Terengganu.
Selangor, Perak, Negeri Sembilan and Pahang joined to become the Federated Malay States, a federation of British protectorates.
Mat Salleh Rebellion: Disputes between locals and the British North Borneo Company led to rebellion.
Chinese leader, Wong Nai Siong and his party started recruiting villagers from Fujian to immigrate to Sibu, Sarawak.